.\" Man page for nclient
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008, Norbert Vegh
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License Verson 2, or any later version at your option.
.\"
.\" Norbert Vegh
.\" ntools@norvegh.com
.\"
.TH nclient 1 "April 20, 2010" "1.5"

.SH NAME
.BR "nclient " "- the TCP client program of ntools"

.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "nclient -ip " "server [" "-port" " port] [" "-max" " maxclients] [" "-file" " distfile]"
.RB "[" "-wait" " waittime] [" "-prec" " prec] [" "-tos" " tos] [" "-int" " statinterval]"
.RB "[" "-stat" " statfile]"

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nclient
is the TCP client program of
.B ntools
that emulates a number of Web clients. Each client connects to
.B nserver
at the specified address, downloads a number of bytes, and exits.
.B nclient
starts the client threads with poissonian process, which means
that the time between the start of the threads is exponential.
You can set the average of this time with the
.B waittime
parameter. You can also set an upper limit on the number of active threads
with the
.B maxclients
paramter. If this limit is reached, the program will not start new downloads.
.PP
The number of bytes to be downloaded is generated randomly based on the
.B distfile
distribution file.
.PP
.B nclient
also provides statistics about the downloads: it dumps the number of downloads,
and the average download time for each file size. The first entry in the
statistics is special, it shows the number of incomplete downloads, where
the connection got broken before the download could be finished.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -ip " server"
The IP address of the host where
.B nserver
is running.
.TP
.BR -port " port"
The TCP port where
.B nserver
waits for incoming connections. If not specified, the default value is 8888.
.TP
.BR -max " maxclients"
The maximum number of client threads that can run on the machine.
The default is 10.
.TP
.BR -file " distfile"
The distribution file with the file sizes. The default is 'distfile' in the local
directory.
.TP
.BR -wait " waittime"
The average time in seconds between the start time of the client threads.
The default is 1. Postfix of 'm' can be used for millisec.
.TP
.BR -prec " precedence"
Sets the precedence value to be used for packet sending.
Its valid range is 0..7, the default is 0.
.TP
.BR -tos " tos"
Sets the Type of Service value to be used for packet sending.
Its valid range is 0..255, the default is 0.
Note that for TCP streams the last 2 bits will be cleared by the kernel.
.TP
.BR -int " statinterval"
Sets the statistical interval in seconds. The program generates statistics in each
interval. The default is 1.
.TP
.BR -stat " statfile"
If this parameter is set, the program will also save the statistics to the
given file.

.SH DISTRIBUTION FILE
This file contains entries in the following manner:
.IP
.B "size   probability"
.PP
.B size
specifies a file size in bytes,
.B probability
is the relative probability for this size. (E.g. if probability for size1 is 10,
and probability for size2 is 1, then the first file size will be downloaded 10 times
more than the second.)
.PP
Only 100 entries are processed from the file, and the sum of the probabilities
must not be bigger than 1000. (If you don't like these restrictions, you can
modify the
.B defs.h
header file, and recompile the package.) Everything after '#'
on a line is considered as comment and ignored.

.SH "NOTES"
.BR nserver " must be running before starting " nclient "."

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B ntools(1), nserver(1).

.SH AUTHOR
Norbert Vegh, ntools@norvegh.com

.SH COPYRIGHT
.BR "nclient " "is (C) 2002-2010 Norbert Vegh"
.br
The program was originally developed in Telia Research AB.
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation;
either version 2 of the License, or (at your	option)
any later version.
.PP
This software is provided without any warranty.
