.\" Man page for nemu
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008, Norbert Vegh
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License Verson 2, or any later version at your option.
.\"
.\" Norbert Vegh
.\" ntools@norvegh.com
.\"
.TH nemu 1 "April 20, 2010" "1.5"

.SH NAME
.BR "nemu " "- the network emulator client of ntools"

.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "nemu -reset -clear -cnt -get"
.PP
.BR "-1closs" " continuous_loss"
.PP
.BR "-1bloss" " bursty_loss" " -1blossm" " bursty_loss_max" " -1blossl" " bursty_loss_length" " -1blossp" " bursty_loss_period"
.PP
.BR "-1delay" " delay"
.PP
.BR "-1cjitter" " continuous_jitter"
.PP
.BR "-1jitter" " jitter" " -1jitterl" " jitter_loss" " -1jitteru" " jitter_up" " -1jitterk" " jitter_keep"
.BR " -1jitterd" " jitter_down" " -1jitterp" " jitter_period"
.PP
.BR "-2closs" " continuous_loss"
.PP
.BR "-2bloss" " bursty_loss" " -2blossm" " bursty_loss_max" " -2blossl" " bursty_loss_length" " -2blossp" " bursty_loss_period"
.PP
.BR "-2delay" " delay"
.PP
.BR "-2cjitter" " continuous_jitter"
.PP
.BR "-2jitter" " jitter" " -2jitterl" " jitter_loss" " -2jitteru" " jitter_up" " -2jitterk" " jitter_keep"
.BR " -2jitterd" " jitter_down" " -2jitterp" " jitter_period"

All parameters are optional.

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nemu
is the network emulator client of
.BR "ntools" ". It is used to change the impairment settings of the emulator daemon. The current settings can be"
.RB "retrieved with the " "-get" " command. When new parameters are supplied all other old parameters remain untouched."
Every time you want to start with fresh new settings, use the
.BR "-reset" " command.
.PP
There are two sets of parameters, for both directions. The parameters with the "-1" prefix
are for the direction from the first interface towards the second one, while prefix "-2" is
for the other direction.

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B -reset
Resets the emulator daemon: clears the impairments and the counters.
.TP
.B -clear
Clears the frame counters.
.TP
.B -cnt
Retrieves the frame counters. There are two counters for each direction: total received frames and dropped frames.
.TP
.B -get
Retrieves the impairment settings of the emulator daemon.

.SH IMPAIRMENTS
.PP
The following impairments are implemented. For the exact format of the parameters see the
.BR "PARAMETERS" " section."
.TP
.B Continuous loss (-1closs loss)
.RB "This impairment will make continuous" " loss" " % frame loss."
.TP
.B Bursty loss (-1bloss loss -1blossm max -1blossl length -1blossp period)
.RB "This impairment implements bursty losses. Periodically, within each" " period" " there will be"
.RB "a loss burst with" " lenght" " length, and" " loss" " % frame loss. With the" " max" " parameter"
it is possible to maximize the number of lost frames in the burst.
.TP
.B Delay (-1delay delay)
This implements continuous delay.
.TP
.B Continuous jitter (-1cjitter jitter)
.RB "This implements continuous random jitter between 0 and" " jitter" "."
.TP
.B Jitter spikes (-1jitter jitter -1jitterl loss -1jitteru up -1jitterk keep -1jitterd down -1jitterp period)
.RB "This modul implements periodic jitter spikes. Within each" " period" " period there will be one jitter spike"
.RB "with trapezoid shape."
.RB "During the spike the jitter will go up from 0 to" " jitter" " within" " up" " time. It will keep that jitter for"
.BR "keep" " time, and then will go down to 0 within" " down" " time. During the keep period" " loss" " % loss is implemented."
(It can be set to 0 if not needed.)
.PP
Any of these impairments can be used together, and their effect is additive. A frame is lost if any of the loss impairments
decides so. The delay and jitter values from the different impairments are simply added together.

.SH PARAMETERS
.PP
.B Loss values
.PP
.RB "The loss values" " (-1closs -1bloss -1jitterl)" " are specified in percentage without the % symbol.
Note that these values will be converted to "1 out of x" internally, so the actual loss ratio
might not exactly match the requested one, especially with high loss ratios.
For example any values above 50% will result in 100% loss.
Please check the actual values with the
.BR "-get" " command."
.PP
.B Time values
.PP
.RB "The time values" " (-1blossl -1blossp -1delay -1cjitter -1jitter -1jitteru -1jitterk -1jitterd -1jitterp)"
are specified in time format. By default the number indicate seconds, while a postfix of "m" and "u" indicates
milli and micro seconds respectively.
.PP

.SH "NOTES"
You must be root to run the emulator client.

.SH "EXAMPLES"
To implement 10 ms delay, and 1% loss ratio:
.IP "" 3
nemu -reset -1delay 10m -1closs 1
.PP
To implement 20 ms delay plus a queue build-up every minute, with build-up and drain time of 1 sec, a keep time of 10 sec,
and 30% loss during the keep time, and 100 ms queue size:
.IP "" 3
nemu -reset -1delay 20m -1jitter 100m -1jitterl 30 -1jitteru 1 -1jitterk 10 -1jitterd 1 -1jitterp 60
.PP
To implement 5 consecutive frame loss every minute:
.IP "" 3
nemu -reset -1bloss 100 -1blossm 5 -1blossl 1 -1blossp 60

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B ntools(1), nemud(1).

.SH AUTHOR
Norbert Vegh, ntools@norvegh.com

.SH COPYRIGHT
.BR "nemu " "is (C) 2002-2010 Norbert Vegh"
.br
The program was originally developed in Telia Research AB.
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation;
either version 2 of the License, or (at your option)
any later version.
.PP
This software is provided without any warranty.
