.\" Man page for nemud
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008, Norbert Vegh
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License Verson 2, or any later version at your option.
.\"
.\" Norbert Vegh
.\" ntools@norvegh.com
.\"
.TH nemud 1 "July 12, 2008" "1.5"

.SH NAME
.BR "nemud " "- the network emulator daemon of ntools"

.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "nemud -1if" " interface1" " -2if" " interface2"

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nemud
is the network emulator daemon of
.BR ntools ". It forwards traffic between the two specified interfaces,"
and can emulate different kind of errors, including loss, delay and jitter impairments.

.B Support for real-time Linux
.PP
.BR "nemud " "supports the CONFIG_PREEMPT_RT kernel patch for precisely timing packet sending."
.RB "Without this patch " "nemud " "has to use active waiting"
to time packet sending, which will result in constant 100% CPU usage.
Upon startup the program checks whether the kernel has the RT support and use it if available.
.PP
For more information about the RT patch visit the following link:
.br
https://rt.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-1if " interface1"
.TP
.BR \-2if " interface2"

.SH "NOTES"
You must be root to run the emulator daemon.
.PP
The throughput of the emulator depends on the CPU speed, the frame size,
and the complexity of the involved impairments.
It is advisable to run some benchmarking with a test instrument before running
live tests. It is recommended to shut down all unnecessary daemons/processes,
and to verify that DMA is enabled on the hard drive with the "hdparm /dev/hda" command.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B ntools(1), nemu(1).

.SH AUTHOR
Norbert Vegh, ntools@norvegh.com

.SH COPYRIGHT
.BR "nemud " "is (C) 2002-2010 Norbert Vegh"
.br
The program was originally developed in Telia Research AB.
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation;
either version 2 of the License, or (at your	option)
any later version.
.PP
This software is provided without any warranty.
