.\" Man page for ngen
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008, Norbert Vegh
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License Verson 2, or any later version at your option.
.\"
.\" Norbert Vegh
.\" ntools@norvegh.com
.\"
.TH ngen 1 "April 20, 2010" "1.5"

.SH NAME
.BR "ngen " "- the UDP/TCP generator program of ntools"

.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "ngen -if " "interface " "-proto udp" "|" "tcp -dstip" " dstip " "-rate" " rate "
.BR  "-dstport" " dstport [" "-size" " size] [" "-srcip" " srcip] [" "-srcport" " srcport]"
.RB " [" "-tos" " tos] [" "-prec" " prec]"
.PP
.BR "ngen -f" " file"

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ngen
is the UDP/TCP generator program of
.BR ntools ". It can generate traffic on arbitrary number of UDP/TCP streams."
Currently three packet generation profile (distribution) are supported:
.IP - 3
.PD 0
Fix: fixed frame size and rate
.IP - 3
On-Off: two states with different frame sizes, rates,
and durations
.IP - 3
Poisson: fixed frame size, exponential inter-packet time
.IP - 3
.PD
TCP: packet generation is controlled by the TCP protocol stack (only for TCP streams)
.PP
Frame sizes and rates are specified on layer 2. It means that they include the
Ethernet overhead.
.PP
On the command line only one stream can be configured with fix distribution.
.PP
The program places sequence number and timestamp into the packets, so that
.BR nrecv " can calculate loss and delay.
.PP
.B MULTICAST
.PP
Multicast traffic is supported with UDP streams. A multicast route must be configured in advance.
Otherwise just a multicast destination address must be configured for this feature.
.PP
.B Sending VLAN traffic
.PP
There are two options for generating VLAN traffic. First, a regular VLAN interface can be configured with
.RB "the standard " "vconfig " "command, and that interface can be used with the " "-if " "option."
.RB "The other solution is to use the low-level mode, see section " "LOW-LEVEL MODE" "."
.PP
.B Support for real-time Linux
.PP
.BR "ngen " "supports the CONFIG_PREEMPT_RT kernel patch for precisely timing packet sending."
.RB "Without this patch " "ngen " "has to use active waiting to time packet sending,"
which will result in constant 100% CPU usage.
Upon startup the program checks whether the kernel has the RT support and use it if available.
.PP
For more information about the RT patch visit the following link:
.br
https://rt.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-f " file"
The config file. No other options can be specified if a config file is used.
.TP
.BR "\-if " "interface"
The sending interface.
.TP
.BR "\-proto udp|tcp"
The protocol can be either UDP or TCP.
.TP
.BR \-dstip " dstip"
The destination IP address.
.TP
.BR \-rate " rate"
The L2 (Ethernet-level) bitrate. It is a number and an optional postfix of 'k' or 'M'
for kbps and Mbps respectively.
.TP
.BR \-size " size"
The frame size in bytes. The default is 1518. Jumbo frames are allowed up to 9018 bytes.
.TP
.BR \-srcip " srcip"
The source IP address. The default is the address of the sending interface.
.TP
.BR \-srcport " srcport"
The source port. The default is 8888.
.TP
.BR \-dstport " dstport"
The destination port.
.TP
.BR \-prec " precedence"
The IP precedence value. Its valid range is 0..7.
.TP
.BR \-tos " tos"
The IP Type of Service value. Its valid range is 0..255.
Note that for TCP streams the last 2 bits will be cleared by the kernel.

.SH "CONFIG FILE"
The config file contains any number of stream specifications in the
following format. (The maximum number of streams is defined in
.BR defs.h ", its default value is 100.)"
.IP "" 3
.PD 0
.B add
.IP
.B {
.IP "" 6
.PD 0
.IP
.BR "if " "interface"
.IP
.BR "proto udp" "|" "tcp"
.BR "srcip " "<srcip-spec>"
.IP
.BR "dstip " "<dstip-spec>"
.IP
.BR "dstmac " "mac"
.IP
.BR "vlan " "vlan"
.IP
.BR "pbits " "pbits"
.IP
.BR "tos" "|" "prec " "tos|prec"
.IP
.BR "srcport " "<srcport-spec>"
.IP
.BR "dstport " "<dstport-spec>"
.IP
.BR "distrib " "<distrib-spec>"
.IP "" 3
.PD
.B }
.PP
Anything after a hashmark (#) on a line is treated as comment, and ignored.
.PP
.B IP AND PORT SPECS
.PP
The
.BR srcip-spec " and " dstip-spec " can be a simple IP address, or an address range"
in the following format:
.IP "" 3
.PD 0
.B range
.IP
.B {
.IP "" 6
.PD 0
.BR "first " "first"
.IP
.BR "inc " "inc"
.IP
.BR "num " "num"
.IP "" 3
.PD
.B }
.PP
.BR first " is the first IP address in the range."
.BR inc " is also in IP address notation. The range is created by adding
.BR inc " successively to the " first " ip address. The range contains"
.BR num " number of addresses."
.PP
The
.BR srcport-spec " and " dstport-spec " can be a simple port number, or a port range."
It has exactly the same format as an address range, expect that here
.BR first " and " inc " are simple numbers."
.PP
If an address/port range is specified, then the successive packets are sent with
the successive address/port from the range. At the end of the range, the first
value is taken.
.PP
Ranges are not supported for TCP streams.
.PP
.B DISTRIB SPECS
.PP
There are different
.BR distrib-spec " formats for each distribution.
.PP
Fix:
.IP "" 3
.PD 0
.B fix
.IP
.B {
.IP "" 6
.PD 0
.BR "rate " "rate"
.IP
.BR "size " "size"
.IP "" 3
.PD
.B }
.PP
.BR rate " is the L2 (Ethernet-level) bitrate. It is a number and an optional postfix of 'k' or 'M'
for kbps and Mbps respectively.
.BR size " is the packet size in bytes."
.PP
On-off:
.IP "" 3
.PD 0
.B on-off
.IP
.B {
.IP "" 6
.PD 0
.BR "rate1 " "rate1"
.IP
.BR "rate2 " "rate2"
.IP
.BR "time1 " "time1"
.IP
.BR "time2 " "time2"
.IP
.BR "size1 " "size1"
.IP
.BR "size2 " "size2"
.IP "" 3
.PD
.B }
.PP
The on-off distribution has two sets of parameters for the two states.
The rate and size parameters are the same as described above. The time
parameters specify the duration of the states in second.
Its format is a number and an optional 'm' or 'u' postfix for ms and us
respectively.
.PP
Poisson:
.IP "" 3
.PD 0
.B poisson
.IP
.B {
.IP "" 6
.PD 0
.BR "size " "size"
.IP
.BR "avgint " "avgint"
.IP "" 3
.PD
.B }
.PP
.BR avgint " is the average inter-packet time of the poisson distribution in seconds."
Its format is a number and an optional 'm' or 'u' postfix for ms and us
respectively.
.PP
TCP:
.IP "" 3
.PD 0
.B tcp
.PD
.PP
There are no further parameters for this distribution.
.PP
.B LOW-LEVEL MODE
.PP
.RB "If the " "dstmac " "parameter is defined, it enables the low-level mode for the stream."
This mode is useful if you want to by-pass the normal routing process.
You need this mode if you want to generate VLAN traffic without
.RB "actually creating the VLAN sub-interfaces. If you want to set the " "vlan " "parameter for"
.RB "the stream, then you have to use this mode, and also specify the " "dstmac " "parameter."
.RB "You can also set the p-bits in the VLAN header with the " "pbits " "parameter."
.br
You can also use this mode if you want to send traffic between interfaces on the same machine
.RB "through an external device under test. In that case you have to set the " "dstmac " "parameter to"
.RB "the MAC address of the receiving interface. You must also specify the " "srcip " "parameter,"
and it cannot be any address on the PC, otherwise the packets will be discarded at the receiver side.
.PP
.B RESTRICTIONS
.PP
Only UDP streams can have
.BR "srcip, dstmac, vlan, pbits " "parameters. The"
.BR "if, proto, dstip " "and " "dstport " "parameters are mandatory. For udp streams if"
.BR srcip " is not defined, it is set to the address of the sending interface."

.SH "NOTES"
You must be root to generate UDP streams.
.PP
For TCP streams the program tries to send out the packets with the specified
rate, but since it uses a normal TCP socket, the sending rate depends on the
network condition, and may be much lower then the configured value.
.PP
For delay measurements the clock of the machines running
.BR "ngen " "and " "nrecv " "must be synchronized. An other way is to"
run both program on the same machine, and use the
.BR low-level " mode."
.PP
.RB "It is important that you understand that without the RT patch " "ngen"
uses active waiting for timing the packet sending.
.RB "It means that when you start " "ngen" ", the CPU usage goes up to 100%."

.SH "EXAMPLES"
To generate a 10 Mbps UDP stream to PC 10.0.0.5 port 8000:
.IP "" 3
ngen -if eth0 -proto udp -dstip 10.0.0.5 -dstport 8000 -rate 10M
.PP
A config file with two stream, on the second stream we send to 10 different addresses of
10.0.50.10, 10.0.50.12 ... 10.0.50.28:
.IP "" 3
.PD 0
add
.IP
{
.IP "" 6
.PD 0
id stream_1
.IP
if eth0
.IP
proto udp
.IP
dstip 10.0.0.5
.IP
dstport 8000
.IP
distrib fix
.IP
{
.IP "" 9
.PD 0
size 500
.IP
rate 500k
.IP "" 6
.PD 0
}
.IP "" 3
.PD 0
}
.IP
.br
.IP
{
.IP "" 6
.PD 0
id stream_2
.IP
if eth0
.IP
proto udp
.IP
dstip range
.IP
{
.IP "" 9
.PD 0
first 10.0.0.10
.IP
inc 0.0.0.2
.IP
num 10
.IP "" 6
.PD 0
}
.IP
dstport 9000
.IP
distrib poisson
.IP
{
.IP "" 9
.PD 0
size 1500
.IP
avgint 1m
.IP "" 6
.PD 0
}
.IP
.IP "" 3
.PD
}

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B ntools(1), nrecv(1).

.SH AUTHOR
Norbert Vegh, ntools@norvegh.com

.SH COPYRIGHT
.BR "ngen " "is (C) 2002-2010 Norbert Vegh"
.br
The program was originally developed in Telia Research AB.
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation;
either version 2 of the License, or (at your	option)
any later version.
.PP
This software is provided without any warranty.
