.\" Man page for nserver
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008, Norbert Vegh
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License Verson 2, or any later version at your option.
.\"
.\" Norbert Vegh
.\" ntools@norvegh.com
.\"
.TH nserver 1 "April 20, 2010" "1.5"

.SH NAME
.BR "nserver" " - the TCP server program of ntools"

.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "nserver" " [" "-port" " port] [" "-prec" " precedence] [" "-tos" " tos]"

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nserver
is the TCP server program of
.B ntools
that emulates a Web server.
When it is started, it binds itself to the specified port, and waits for
incoming connections. For each connection, it starts a new thread,
reads the number of bytes that has to be sent, and after sending the
requested number of bytes, it terminates the connection.
.B nserver
can also set the precedence or TOS value for the generated packets.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-port " port"
The TCP port where
.B nserver
will wait for incoming connections.
If not specified, the default value is 8888.
.TP
.BR \-prec " precedence"
Sets the precedence value to be used for packet sending.
Its valid range is 0..7, the default is 0.
.TP
.BR \-tos " tos"
Sets the Type of Service value to be used for packet sending.
Its valid range is 0..255, the default is 0.
Note that for TCP streams the last 2 bits will be cleared by the kernel.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B ntools(1), nclient(1).

.SH AUTHOR
Norbert Vegh, ntools@norvegh.com

.SH COPYRIGHT
.BR "nserver" " is (C) 2002-2010 Norbert Vegh"
.br
The program was originally developed in Telia Research AB.
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation;
either version 2 of the License, or (at your	option)
any later version.
.PP
This software is provided without any warranty.
